What’s that in your hand? A piece of plastic? What are you going to do with it when you’re finished using it? Do you know what happens to it once you have ‘disposed’ of it?
Here’s the good news: you are in San Francisco. They have recycling here, and composting. This city was the first ever to have a citywide composting program, and 80% of its waste is diverted from landfill (general waste) to compost and recycling.

Here’s the bad news: not everyone lives in San Francisco, and most places outside of this bubble lack either the systems or the resources to implement such coherent and effective recycling and composting programs. Most places also lack regulations to limit plastic usage, and the education systems to improve recycling on individual, communal, or even industrial levels.
Humans have already produced over 9 billion tons of plastic. We use it every day; we dispose of it every day. It is part of our lives and we have been conditioned to depend on it. From the bag that contains the plastic knife and fork you got with your takeout lunch, to the computer sitting in front of you, it seems it is everywhere and ubiquitous.

Certainly, from the swathe of articles and images flooding our daily feeds of birds and sea creatures, and even some land creatures, getting sick and dying from stomachs full of plastic, this is a problem. Not to mention the growing Great Pacific Garbage Patches of floating (mostly) plastic debris that contain decades worth of discarded materials.

“Microplastics make up 94 percent of an estimated 1.8 trillion pieces of plastic in the patch. But that only amounts to eight percent of the total tonnage. As it turns out, of the 79,000 metric tons of plastic in the patch, most of it is abandoned fishing gear — not plastic bottles or packaging drawing headlines today.”
These man-made atrocities were first discovered in 1997, and now, in 2019, are even large and more spread out. But why is it, over 20 years later, that the world population, and its governments, has not been able to stem this flow of human effluvia into the natural world? And how can we talk about remedies and solutions? And is it enough to be discussing how to clean up and recycle the results of our selfish negligence, or should we be looking to reduce the production of plastic altogether, even if it inconveniences us?
The author recently took a poll on plastic usage and production among classmates and social media contacts (age range: roughly 18–45), and the following two charts show the trend towards a desire to produce less plastic:


PEST Analysis
A cursory investigation shows that the vast majority of solutions to plastic pollution are reactive ones (i.e. dealing with the plastic post-production, post-use). (You can track your own individual plastic footprint here.) The recycling industry has come on leaps and bounds in the last few decades, and more people around the world, as well as policy makers and even companies, are more keenly aware of the long term effects of plastic pollution and their footprint on the world.
Political Trends
The Market is just right politically, as more and more people are talking about climate change and pollution in public every day now. Prince Harry is making speeches at every opportunity about personal responsibility around waste and recycling and recognizing your footprint. Despite the ‘Denyers’ fighting this at every corner, there is greater social and global awareness than ever of the lasting impact humans are having on the planet. There is also greater civic responsibility than ever to deal with the growing mountains of plastic waste that we are producing and processing.
Economic/Demographic Trends
One thing is certain: recycling is big business these days, and the markets for both plastic production and processing used plastics, are both growing. “The global Plastic Recycling market was 25600 million US$ in 2018 and is expected to 41200 million US$ by the end of 2025.”
The good news: the textile industry is consuming over 30% of recycled plastic these days. Coca Cola and many other companies have pledged to reduce packaging waste.
The bad news: These trends are way overdue, and they don’t go far enough yet. Although awareness of the plastic problem is increasing all the time among individuals, communities, markets and nations, it had not yet reached the fever pitch required to sway public and national opinion and legislation in most places. This is especially true of developing countries, many of which are still (finally) basking in the glow of late capitalism and its disposable, over-processed, over-packaged glory. (This author noted the general urban and suburban sprawl of garbage in Rajasthan in 2015, but was assured by locals that the conditions were much better now that the leading politician had brought in stricter laws. Still, many ‘holy’cows, which freely wander the streets in search of their dinner, end up dead with distended stomachs full of plastic waste. Just like their waterbound counterparts.)
Social/Taste Trends
Stories of plastic pollution are clogging up our minds and our feeds more and more in 2019. This can only be a good thing: the more we talk and learn about it, collectively, the more chance there is of the situation improving.

Not only are people talking about the problems plastic causes, but they’re googling the topic more, too.
Technological Trends/Breakthroughs
Ampacet positions itself as a company with both proactive and reactive solutions. Chiefly, it “loads molecular tracers as well as the pigment into the masterbatch so that the masterbatch becomes essentially a tracking device molded into a plastic product, such as rigid or flexible packaging.”
Scientists have found a fungus at a rubbish dump near Islamabad in Pakistan which breaks down plastic. It has the potential, if developed and effectively introduced, to take a big bite out of our plastic problem. However, there are concerns about spreading a non-native species about which we still know very little into other ecosystems and environments. Humans already have a very patchy record in this field.
However, reactive solutions are not stemming the flow of virgin plastic production. There are few regulations governing the petrochemical-plastics industry, ones which would force them to commit to reducing their virgin (new) plastic production year on year, and come up with serious alternatives to non-compostable plastic production. In fact, this Medium article claims that plastic production is as (un)healthy as ever. Even the October 2018 ‘New Plastics Economy Global Commitment’, “signed by over 290 corporations that collectively produce some 20 percent of the world’s packaging… has been criticized for being vague and allowing signatories to sidestep the issue of new plastic production.” Over 300 metric tons of new plastic are produced each year, with no sign of that number falling.
The comparison matrix below shows some of the varied remedies and solutions to the plastic surplus we have created. Most of these solutions are reactive, as in reacting to the build up of waste. Very few are addressing the problem proactively, or going to the source of the plastic producers. There is evidence of strong lobbying to protect the interests of mass plastic producers, hence the lack of sustained public and private efforts to reduce the production rate. But the good news is that more people are clamoring for change at the inception level.

Or, you could just make your own recycled plastic island.
User Interviews
But for those of us who can’t just cut themselves adrift, what can we do to remedy this growing problem? This author conducted user interviews to see what people know, and what they think, about plastic. While most appeared to have at least some interest in recycling, everyone agreed that the amount of plastic in the world is, or is becoming, a serious problem. However, one interviewee pointed out the use of plastics is direly needed in supporting disabled people. Although there was a wide spread of opinions on how well mankind was dealing with, and containing, the plastic it produces, it was also seen as being addressed differently by different countries and cultures. Many argued that, while California was doing reasonable well in terms of education and accessibility to recycling programs, other places we often falling (way) behind. they also cited the need for better rewards programs, expanded accessibility, and greater civic, private, and individual responsibility, as well as penalties, as ways to better tackle the ever-increasing amount of plastic. In a poll of which future initiative they would throw their weight and money at, most users said they would support investment in a newly-discovered fungus which eats plastic, over a company which can create individualized plastic batch molecular tagging, or supporting the cleanup efforts and technology working on the Great Pacific Garbage Patch.
However, after also hearing concerns about introducing a non-native fungus that we know little about into new environments, this author was convinced that the second most popular initiative would be the best option. Not only could it be used to monitor plastic production and waste containment shortcomings of corporations and regions, but also to hold the accountable for their actions.
Solution: WasteTracker
Enter WasteTracker: a program which collects data on major institutions, nations, and industries, as well as individual companies, around the world, and lets you track their monthly and yearly plastic output via a database app. It also tracks whether they are promising to reduce their plastic output, and if they are meeting the goals of their promises. This way the average consumer, as well as the industry insider, can see which companies and governments are making the clearest efforts to reduce plastic, and where consumer and voter pressure needs to be applied most in the fight to reduce global and local plastic production., and improve ‘end-of-life’ solutions such as collection and recycling.
It harnesses the power of molecular tracers to identify plastic waste, and report back to the database on where, and when, the plastic was found. The result would be a global map with filters for each country, industry, and company, showing the spread of their plastic waste around the world, over time. Thus giving the user of the app (whether it be concerned citizen or a CEO, an environmental analyst or a government watchdog) a clear and readable picture from which to track single or multiple plastic footprints.
While WasteTracker may only appear to operate on the reactive side of the scale, since each piece of plastic is encoded with molecular trackers, these trackers will be logged by the company or organization that produces it, and records will be be used to compare both plastic output and what happens to it after it’s used. Organizations and governments would be offered the chance to submit their data voluntarily, or risk being added to the app as a visible, non-participatory agency. Being able to track the local and global efforts by each agency will allow users and watchdogs to better see who is making a difference, who is trying to make a difference, and who is not.